---
layout: post
title: Mnemonic Techniques for Learning Chinese Characters
---

If you've ever tried to learn to read or write Chinese characters you've probably come across some of the various mnemonic techniques that people use to learn them. These mnemonic techniques can be far more effective than rote memorization, and when used properly can allow a person to learn dozens of characters a day. Since the diversity of these techniques can be confusing I thought I would make a post outlining them and describing the pros and cons of each.

## Technique 1: Rote Memorization

This is the simplest technique for learning Chinese characters, and still the one that the majority of students of Chinese use. Rote memorization may not be the most efficient method for learning Chinese characters, but when combined with spaced repetition it can still be effective, and it acts as a good baseline to judge other techniques against.

### Pros

* Dead simple to learn  
* Naturally teaches stroke order  
* Deals well with non-standard characters

### Cons

* Seemingly less effective than mnemonic based techniques

## Technique 2: The Heisig Method

This is the grandfather of all the mnemonic techniques that I know of. It was first developed by James Heisig to learn Japanese and is outlined in the popular book Remembering the Kanji. Additional books have since been released which apply the technique to both simplified and traditional Chinese. The technique works as follows: each character is broken down into components, and each component (which may be a character itself) is assigned a keyword. The keywords of the components are used to construct a story which cues for the keyword of the character itself. In this way the student uses visual and narrative based memory to remember how to write and recognize each character. For example the character 贡（貢）is given the keyword “tribute” and is broken down into the components 工 (“work”) and 贝（trad. 貝）(“shellfish”). These components are used to construct a story about the work of collecting shells used as currency to give as tribute to a ruler.

### Pros

* Much more effective than rote memorization  
* Relatively simple and easy to learn  
* Teaches writing as well as recognition

### Cons
* Doesn’t teach pronunciation  
* Doesn’t naturally teach stroke order

## Technique 3: The Marilyn Method

The Marilyn method was introduced by Serge Gorodish as an improvement of the Heisig method that also teaches pronunciation. If you want a detailed description you should read [his blog post](https://countryoftheblind.blogspot.com/2012/01/mnemonics-for-pronouncing-chinese.html), but the gist is that it breaks pinyin pronunciation down into initial, intermediate, final, and tone, with each unique sound in these categories being assigned to an actor, a category of actors, a location, and a sublocation respectively. These sound associated items are then incorporated into each mnemonic story so that the story cues for the pronunciation of the character as well as the keyword. If that sounds complicated that’s because it is, and I think that’s one of the main barriers to the Marilyn method becoming more popular.

### Pros

* Teaches pronunciation  
* Teaches writing

### Cons

* Complex and difficult to master  
* High startup cost, since you have to come up with dozens of actors and locations  
* The added complexity means you will learn characters more slowly than with pure Heisig

## Technique 4: The Hanzi Movie Method

This is Mandarin Blueprint’s Marilyn method derived technique for teaching Chinese characters. The differences to the stock Marilyn method are small and mainly involve changing some of the actor categories, so I won’t go into too much detail here. The pros and cons are basically the same as the Marilyn method.

## Technique 5: HanziHero AKA Marilyn lite

HanziHero is a web based learning application that teaches Chinese characters using the Marilyn method. The main difference from stock Marilyn is that it only teaches recognition and not writing.

### Pros

* Easy to get started  
* Character learning order is already figured out  
* Includes character decompositions, keywords and stories

### Cons

* You have to pay to access the entire character list  
* Prewritten mnemonics don’t always stick in your memory as well as ones you write yourself  
* Teaches only recognition, not writing, which in my opinion doesn’t play to the strengths of the Marilyn method.

## Conclusion

I hope this post was able to clarify some of the differences between these mnemonic techniques and left you with a better idea of which one is best suited to your studies. I may update this list if I come across another notable technique, or if someone invents a new one. Also I want to add that no matter which of these methods you choose to use, the truly important thing is the framework in which you use them. Without some kind of spaced repetition and active recall you will quickly forget everything you learned.  
